if you've got the knowledge of how to  live here this environment is one of the  last remaining gardens of Eden on earth  visible from space the Great Rift Valley  extends from Mozambique through East  Africa into Turkey over 6,000 miles in  length massive tectonic movements have  buckled the Earth's crust giving the  dramatic scenery which is characteristic  of Tanzania here in the spectacular  region of Leakey a sea in Tanzania some  of the most important clues to the  evolution of our species have been  uncovered this is the Olduvai Gorge  which for millions of years has born  silent witnessed the changing fortunes  of humankind but is only in the last  century that we've really started to  piece together the clues the gorge has  to offer skull fragments stone tools and  other fossils have revolutionized the  way we think about our origins for me  the most intriguing of these clues are a  set of footprints left here in volcanic  ash over three and a half million years  ago in a way all of our footprints can  be traced back to that ancient trail but  of course we haven't all walked in the  same direction these footprints belong  to a people who've taken a totally  different path the Hadza  numbering less than a thousand people  they inhabit the lands around Leakey I  see an area of 1,000 square miles the  Hadza are one of the few tribes of true  hunter-gatherers left in the world in  this semi-arid bushland the bulk of  their food is obtained by collecting  berries roots and honey from wild bees  but the most prized food source is meat  and the heads are loved hunting they see  dik-dik  they give thanks for their kill for  thousands of years the Hadza have lived  in harmony with their environment taking  from it only what they need if a man  kills a small animal like this dick dick  he will share it with the people he  happens to be with at the time if he  kills a large animal like a buffalo then  the hands will up camp and move to the  kill  it's easier  they had to have no Chiefs or headman  and this allows for a high degree of  mobility anyone can live hunt and gather  wherever he or she chooses rock outcrops  like this so-called keka Teta hey  they're important places for the Hadza  enabling them to look out for wild game  and approaching strangers this one is  particularly important because it's also  the burial site of a man called wash  EEMA and as being a great hunter and the  father of many children in the land  around here it's the perfect place to  build your house or as they had to call  it a charcoal the women are strong  independent and highly skilled they have  to be they built the huts and although  they marry and have children they are in  control of their own lives  they intertwine branches to make a  beehive shape frame which is covered  with grass the whole process only takes  about two hours don't work in that  whatever it was all done the Hadza live  in small nomadic groups and have hardly  any possessions they move camp every few  weeks for a number of reasons death or  illness a shortage of water to avoid the  build-up of vermin or just the feeling  that living in one place for too long is  bad  this taco taco a burka puta ah ha ha ha  Nico I attended each other day I suck at  me huh broke up with Todd's a bit  awkward today to actually date it's  awkward awkward today ha ha - I'm not a  debate with the Singapore tashahud ah I  see  she's also told me that this fireplace  isn't just for cooking it's for  protection helping to keep out any  dangerous animals this is the village of  Sun Ola and like most hands of villages  there's a tremendous sense of  togetherness here the people enjoy each  other's company spend a lot of time  together sharing their possessions and  their food willingly while the men take  care of hunting matters the women spend  a lot of time collecting and preparing  food although chores often simply become  social events the children here  experience almost unlimited freedom  although by necessity they have to  become extremely self-reliant they begin  to forage from an early age learning  which berries and roots are good to eat  oh yeah ba gua kopaka para una herida  China or anak sotc so otama Scirocco so  a Bemidji cheat on Jacques de cocoa so  da Vinci Tasha Quay SoCo sutiya Gregoire  aquitine uh PA what's up RA if you Chi  from the age of two boys start to  practice on butterflies and insects  gradually becoming more adept and  competing with each other around the  camp by 10 they're shooting a fair  amount of meat such as birds small  mammals and reptiles Simon Nicol  ba-ba-ba pamoja  and aqua Asher Jimmy B category  cha-cha-cha-cha-cha ma se tota Minako se  da de la mia no Kunz equal to CDV since  the 1920s there have been several  attempts to encourage the Hadza to live  in permanent settlements and become farm  labourers these attempts failed as the  majority of the heads have preferred to  return to the bush and continue their  traditional lifestyle which benefits  them with a diet that is varied and  nutritious while they sometimes  experience hunger they have never known  famine this is a typical handsome eel  the women will share the food amongst  everybody they chew the root to soften  it before giving it to the youngest  children Gama Lebanon a you know the  hands are adorable and like to dance  they'll dance if there's food they'll  dance if they're hungry they'll dance if  there's a sickness or there's good  fortune it bonds them together and they  will walk for miles to join the dance  they're resourceful and adaptable loving  color they use whatever is available for  decoration even bits of old plastic  Apple cut tsukasa-kun Yokota lockup Oh -  ha man and boo-boo she approaches a  relatively the men here have invited me  to make a walk with them to another camp  now that's about 60 kilometers straight  through the bush so they're insisting  that like the children I should also be  self-reliant they say they're gonna make  me a bow and arrow for my protection and  in just one day MacGregor is cutting the  branch from the moussaka code tree to  make the boat  he scrapes off the bark and shapes the  wood to support the bowstring at the  base he's tying on a piece of old cloth  and then at the top he uses a strip of  bark from the America tree he's using an  old bowstring made from the neck  ligament of a large animal he bends the  bow with his knee to get the tension  right and ties are very distinctive not  that the hands are always used now he's  making me an arrow and as any Archer  knows that's even more difficult than a  bow he makes a knock which fits the  bowstring and then straightens it guinea  fowl wing or tail feathers provide the  fletching by softening some ligament in  his mouth  it becomes self-adhesive and he uses  this to attach the feathers  he Ruffins the point of the arrow to  receive the barb  and again this is tied on with ligament  well that's quite incredible I've been  watching this now most of the day and  that's all it's taken for this man to  make this bow a little and this arrow  which is barbed and intended for getting  birds and just with a knife he's been  able to fashion this beautiful arrow  thank you  new bear you diet loose don't god no  then try  the hands that don't need maps and  compasses because they know this land  intimately having walked every single  inch of it for me it's a real pleasure  to be able to walk with them and see it  through their eyes  guys have been telling me rivers like  this crisscross their territory and that  when the rains come they can flood from  dry beds to torrents in minutes and just  as quickly fall again fortunately though  some of the water gets trapped in the  riverbed where it can be accessed at  permanent pools during times of drought  that's important to the handout and to  the wildlife but now those pools are  drying up as they're drained by wells  dug by the herders for their cattle  what's more those wells are themselves a  danger animals the size of zebra have  been known to fall into them and drown  while trying to drink Kirika li mochou a  Minako kouha atta boy super yummy a TCK  accra yatta togepi possibly Shaco but  abhishek wati wati be it a bit Obama  Nakata aluminum aluminum obukhov acaba  Rebecca Brittany charted katashi a quote  I think if in which these Corral's  aren't used by the Hadza  these are built by herders who've been  displaced into this area from outside  sometimes they'll build a corral or a  boma like this for just one night the  really tragic thing is they're cutting  down trees that are an important source  of food for the Hadza and if they're not  doing that then they cut them down  anyway because they say the trees hold  Tetsu flies which will harm their cattle  in the bush you're constantly on the  lookout for any danger as well as a bite  to eat like the incredibly sweet in  Lucia be you chew on do she be cuckoo  chata a Ducati aqua a beyond ushi Oni P  ma kuzuha Bogota Kakaako tibideaux  equals ax y circle chapati asana ba coz  cameo tattoo nation will happen uh  trauma in say haha karma sake aqua  is that it is that what you'd break me  up here for this is Claire Clark oh yeah  you can see how far I've come  that is Leakey I see in the distance and  the guys have dragged me all the way up  here just for this this is what they use  to make their fire drill the working end  is the thickened that is three cut off  quite neatly and then the bark is  removed you can see the stick is still  quite green it has to be allowed to dry  out the score it can be used so why do  they go to such lengths to get this  stick well the reason is it's a for  superior wood most people in the world  who use the hand drill for fire lighting  prepare everything the drill like I'm  making and the piece that it's going to  drill in and then carry both of those  bits with them because this drill is so  good that they can go to almost any tree  break off a dead branch and make fire  kudo and i set up camp for the night  fire is the first priority as it will  give us warmth and protection this is  snake and big cat country  the others are off doing what they like  best hunting it's a matter of prestige  to use a powerful bow they can be about  5 feet long and require a pull of over  100 pounds and like Bo hunters  everywhere they had to rely on their  ability to stalk close to their prey  these Impala get away but they didn't  come back empty-handed dick dicker a  small antler still abundant in this area  where other game is disappearing  it tastes like sweet venison and they  waste nothing  nightfall is the favored time to hunt  the had to climb a tree at dusk and look  out telltale movement in the bush  over centuries the Hadza have  assimilated an astonishing knowledge of  their environments potential this  amazing plant is called the Desert Rose  or pan Jubei  enhancer it's lethal  this is one of the few places it grows  they come here to prepare their arrows  to hunt a larger game a my Dahlia bar  today  ah I'm on an Waddell now uncle this  poison is now ready and he's forming the  poison behind the barb of the arrow  thank you there you are it's finished  good has told me that this poison is  made today is particularly strong and  it's extremely dangerous  before he molded it he carefully checked  these fingers had no cuts on them  because if this poison got into any cuts  even a small one he'd probably die now  when this is in use and an animal's been  shot with it and died they had to be  very careful to cut out the meat  surrounding the wound so that nobody  becomes poisoned the only problem with  this poison this is extremely fragile  it's very easily damaged by moisture or  from being knocked so now that he's put  it on he has to wrap it up with leather  to protect it  had to call these RACs Kalika wakil and  they're full of palm trees each one of  these palm trees is holding about 200  fruit that's an awful lot of food for  the hanser and like a vandal in the  Garden of Eden yes that's amazing that's  delicious it tastes just like sort of a  dried ginger cake in how do they call it  men young goopy Oh Sabina this is one of  the most unusual one of the most  delicious fruits I've ever eaten  so may I on or new be had that be you  look at that we be  this is Leopard hill gets its name from  an old had a story about a group that  came up here once looking for food well  there wasn't any for one of the group an  old man is a bit stubborn very tired  decided it stay up here for the night on  his own problem is there was a leopard  up here with the same idea and it ate  him but whatever this Hill is a  fantastic site the landmark that means  I'm almost at mangola  I can tell you that's a really welcome  sight  hey I'm a Yama Yama Yama who beat a a  debate yo Kharma so wat m8 a chocobo tha  jean-bob sha oh man it's a sad story to  end our journey Gouda says we were happy  here but then other people came and cut  down the trees for farms their goats and  cows have eaten the grass and now all  the animals from God have run away and  now we have no food however they live in  hope from the outside the heads are may  appear incredibly primitive but in fact  they're anything but in my time here  I've come to realise that they know this  land better than anyone and that they've  developed a sophisticated knowledge that  enables them to live here in harmony  with the land and it's animals skills  which bring them immense freedom and  happiness but despite being some of the  poorest people on earth they have joy  and liberty values which our money  simply combine